Javascript is the result of a long tradition of programming languages and ways to solve the problems entailing computer sciences. The solutions implemented in the first stages of JS can be traced back to HyperTalk and HyperCard, a programming language and a software framework respectively, implemented on Apple Computers in 1987. It was designed to introduce regular users to basic programming concepts, much like Visual Basic with Microsoft. HyperTalk supported the basic control structures of procedural languages: repeat for/while/until, if/then/else, as well as function and message "handler" calls . Data types were transparent to the user, conversion happened transparently in the background between strings and numbers. There were no classes or data structures in the traditional sense; their place was taken by special string literals, or rather "lists" of "items" delimited by commas. HyperCard was simply the framework that interpreted and executed HyperTalk.

HyperCard was based on a concept of virtual cards on a rolodex, with interactive objects, textfields, checkboxes, buttons, and other GUI elements. Every card had it's own script, a code-carrying element written in Hypertalk that directed what to do with user input, listening to the event generated by input and then handling the incoming data to output something. At the time, Macintosh put this tool on the hands of the users as a way to empower them and generate their own content, their own hypermedia. Now, it seems almost trivial, but back then it was revolutionary. People took HyperCard and ran with it, extending it's purposes beyond what designers and developers could come up with. People used it as a software to run slide presentation, given that PowerPoint had not been invented yet, and even write videogames with it. In fact, one of the most succesful uses of HyperCard as a legitimate tool to create software was the first edition of Myst, the seminal Adventure Game for the PC. HyperCard was historical and remarkable due to the fact that it introduced to the world the concepts of hypermedia and hypertext. 

Tim Berners-Lee built the first Web Server in 1990, piggybacking on the Transmission Control Protocol and Domain Name System (both drawn by IEEE scholars Vinton Cerf and Bob Kahn). With it, the first web browser, aptly called WorldWideWeb.

In 1993, Marc Andreessen and Eric Bina started Mosaic at the University of Illinois in an attempt to create a web browser better than those available at the time. It's ease of use and portability, achieved by the Mac and Windows ports of 1994, had detonated the widespread use of the World Wide Web from an academic oddity to a legitimate tool. It supported all the protocols used by Berners-Lee, giving users and developers a tool to implement the data protocol of their choice. The Mosaic team split into two startups: Netscape and Spyglass, which would later be purchased by Microsoft to develop Internet Explorer.

The browser wars were just about the start.

In April of 1995, Brendan Eich, a graduate of SGI and MicroUnity, was hired into Netscape Communications Coroporation to put Scheme, the programming language that had spearheaded Object-Oriented Programming, into the browser to change the paradigm of the then nascent Web from a static document delivery system into something a lot more palatable for developers and users alike. Instructed to write a programming language that had the ease of use and approachability of Basic, but a syntax akin to Java, Brendan Eich was inspired by the ideas and script consturction of HyperTalk, a decade ago. He decided to incorporate HyperTalk, the Java-like syntax, and ideas of the prototypal-inheritance from the Self Programming Language into one package. Pressured by Netscape to deliver the product quickly, Eich designed and implemented a solution in 10 days.

This solution was to be eventually named Javascript, a programming language designed to compete with Microsoft aggresively and the omnipresence of Java Web Applet, then the emerging standard of dynamic web pages. 

At first called LiveScript, Javascript was christened this way because it was spurned out of the partnership with Sun Microsystems and Netscape Communications, eager to colaborate in the face of beign stomped out by Microsoft's future implementations. ActiveX is the most famous one of Microsoft's attempts to monopolize web content, forcing users to use Internet Explorer rather than their competition. Not wanting to be left behind, Microsoft reverse engineered the Netscape JavaScript Engine and published their own implementation, called JScript. Sun owned the JavaScript trademark, so Microsoft had to circunvent this. 

In an effort to elbow their competition, Netscape decided to make a standard out of Javascript as the definitive language for the web. They approached the World Wide Web Consortium and the International Organization for Standarization, only to be rejected. Eventually, they found their standardizing committee in the European Computer Manufacturers Association, or ECMA. The standardization process was hampered with the inability to call the language JavaScript, as Sun owned the trademark. Eventually, the JS standard emerged as ECMAScript. For over two decades, ECMAScript is almost analogous to JavaScript, and determines the feature list and capabilities on your browser. Oddly enough, the trademark is owned by Oracle, however they have never chosen to exercise it. 

Javascript prevailed over Java and ActiveX through the virtue of two frameworks: AJAX and JSON.

In 1999, Microsoft used its iframe technology to dynamically update the news stories and stock quotes on the default page for Internet Explorer, and created the XMLHTTP ActiveX control in Internet Explorer 5. Not to be outdone, The Mozilla Foundation, Safari, Opera Software and other browsers as the XMLHttpRequest JavaScript object, breaking away from the available ECMA standard. Through the adoption of this paradigm, developers could asynchronously load content onto the webpage through the server without causing the content to be downloaded over and over again, using XML as a computer-readable and human-readable format to serialize the data on browser memory. However, the use of these solutions was always browser-specific, as the breakthroughs in the language tend to be, and developers had to write for every possible browser option they could think of in order to support all clients. No one really had a name for it unil Jesse Garrett coined a universal term for it: Asynchronous Javascript and XML, or AJAX. Garrett defined the AJAX application model as a two way communication with the client, housing the markup and the AJAX engine, and the server, which in turn housed server and backend processing, including datastores. This approach decoupled the client, written in Javascript, from server activity by making it responsible of recieving and sending data to keep the client updated, XML as the intermediary between both. Though implemented first by Microsoft, the concept was detonated by its use in Google Maps, Groups and Suggest, that used the XMLHttpRequest featured implemented in JavaScript. This would be later standardized by ECMA and pushed ddevelopment away from Java Applets.

However, XML had a significant caveat: It’s too verbose, which given a large enough dataset consumes a lot of bandwidth. It is also a lot stricter than a lot of people would like and given the potential for an XML document to be composed from many different namespaces and for a type to have both elements and attributes. For small data sets, this complexity is almost trivial, however once the data developers had to deal with increasingly complex, it stopped being an ideal fit for most programming models. As a result of this, parsing XML can be quite cumbersome especially inside of a browser, incurring on the danger of memory leaks and pages that do not update correctly. To overcome both of these problems, a better data serialization format had to come around. 

Enter Douglas Crockford, then working at State Software, with a simple data serialization format: The JavaScript Object Notation, JSON for short. The format was created using what Crockford percieved as the potential of Javascript as bridge between visual, dynamic contexts on the web. Simple, agile, and able to be parsed as a string, the performance achieved by serializing data in the JSON format for both web browsers and servers ran circles around what was accomplished with AJAX. Adoption was almost instantaneous by Google and Yahoo, who by January 2007 offered their services through the use of JSON Messaging. Crockford quickly standardized his creation, based on the third version of the ECMA Script Standard, and encouraged the creation of libraries and bindings for the new format. Again, adoption was massive. By all accounts, JSON is now a language-independent data serialization format, able to be read on practically any platform and any programming language. 

By all accounts, Javascript should have never evolved at the pace nor the size it did. Its turbulent history shows in its features, with mistakes and oversights carried over its ancestry. Other more questionable decisions can be traced back to Brendan Eich's short time span in creating and implementing the language. These mistakes have been corrected over the years, however the writers of the ECMA standard have always been at odds with browser vendors, as they continue to implement browser-specific features in their own engines. Even today, performance is not equal across all possible platforms, and it has fragmented even further with the advent of Mobile Computing that presented its own set of challenges. People like John Resig and TJ Holowaychuck have created careers out of writing fixes, shims and libraries that have extended Javascript's functionality and fixed some of its short comings. However, this does not shadow the excellent choices and evolution of this quirky language. From a scripting toy that only served to change the color of html tags to full-fledged applications, Javascript is now a force to be reckoned with, specially on the coming years.

For more information on this subject, I recommend watching Crockford on Javascript's History of JavaScript.